hundred millimeters folding over
relatively short periods of time once
again
there's all due to very moist air
sitting through the eastern states
there's also a trough moving through
victoria and the south west welcome back
to let's play out
your sophie my name is carson can't
expect to see
is
heavy rainfall up around the northern
part of the peninsula
[Music]
i don't believe we've been to
here on abc news and enjoy your
[Music]
and then we'll evening this way what
could that be
tomorrow on news breakfast yeah we'll
get us into the festive spirit with the
man as hell holiday special about to hit
our screens
and a story of renewal this will get an
let's see if we have anything
interesting
and what a year it's been
if find out it's just so rewarding
you have the ability to watch life and
nature
they're around you gardening australia
tomorrow on abc and ivy well this was it
of anywhere awaits on abc eye view
let's look for something else to explore
carried me to these places and i know i
thought imaginable
no not there together
uh i don't know that we finished
exploring the following
[Music]
when you strip away the commercialism
the cultural non-inclusiveness
values against
[Music]
8 inclusivity abc and eye view specs and
specs return well for a special episode
celebrating music you have the 2010s
cooper and luke mcgregor see you very
soon australia
the speaks and specs 2010 special sunday
on abc and eye view it's been a year
like no other unprecedented thank you
very much
that was a kind of annoying thing to
fight i'll go ahead and grab it
and i'm sure i'll be back here at some
point
and at nine charlie pickering
[Music]
wherever you are know the story with abc
news
the most trusted news source get
breaking news updates with live
notifications
plus the latest news from australia and
around the world if the situation
deteriorates
yeah go to news.abc.net
or download ponies we love the aussie
lifestyle
from the bush to the beach abundance of
beauty
but when beauty becomes the beast
[Music]
we've got reporters right across all of
the affected regions tonight
reliable source for information abc
radio we're all there for them
stay connected on tv radio and the
all-new abc emergency website give me a
lot of
coronavirus case numbers rise in
sydney's northern beaches as authorities
race to find the source of the new
infections
a lot of various uh
one of those things blackboards
solar crystals and like vitamin soil
recovering
soil for supplements and growth in the
economy
fiji residents braced themselves for the
arrival of category five
see how tough you are we're gonna give
this our all and australia makes a
strong start in the first test against
india at the adelaide oh yeah this will
be no problem
[Music]
health authorities believe all five
cases on the city's northern beaches are
late let's go
reporter ronnie heyman has more we have
one additional case that has been
identified by new south wales health
this afternoon and that is
the northern beaches and they are the
partner of a woman
in her 50s who tested positive earlier
on today
that woman worked as a residential aged
care worker and
people used materials villages
is one of two people who tested positive
today
another man also tested positive and he
was a
drummer in a band and he's from french's
forest
i know what i should do retirement
village that the woman worked at has
been
closed to visitors and the contact is
underway to determine whether anybody
else has been
infected by this woman
today the penrose are uh
the avalon rsl club and the curability
club what i should do after i meet this
guy
and anyone who visited
the 13th of december on the 14th of
december are being advised to
go and get tested for the virus and to
self-isolate
for 14 days we heard from the new south
wales health minister brad hazard
earlier here's what he had to say
come forward as heroes to put themselves
there and be tested
and now they're doing what they need to
do uh
the last couple of days has been a very
telling reminder that we are living in
the middle of a pandemic
certainly i've been out about the last
couple of weeks and i've seen people
everywhere far more complacent than i've
seen them since literally january this
year
[Applause]
um
it's some sort of force giving a
reminder to all of us that uh we're in
the middle of a pandemic
new south wales health are now
undergoing urgent genome sequencing
is good but it has no heal on single
bonus
we do know that the health minister the
chief health officer said that we are
expecting some lab results to come
through at seven o'clock tonight so
hopefully from then on we should have
some more details
well for more i'm joined by michael
reagan who's the mayor of the northern
beaches council michael regan actually
thank you so much for your time
um how concerned are you right now is
this a try
oh we're as concerned as new south wales
around it's a great wake-up call and
we're doing everything we can to assist
and help
are there testing resources
you came at the perfect time testing
centers what's going on in your region
this morning we're about to play hide
and seek with everything
we um fix all that we've got some new
things
[Music]
all right here we go i think so i was up
at the newport to check it out
in terms of what the lines were like
that time we started thinking and that
seems
to be going okay
people are doing the right thing and
going and getting tested no one wants um
this to be come back in any sort of way
shape or form and they're doing the
right thing and a positive thing
and we've reached out to the businesses
too to help them in terms of if they
need to deep clean councils
jumping in to assist with resourcing
them as well so you said you've reached
out to the businesses
have you spoken to management there i
haven't but i'm pretty sure our staff
have
they're looking to do whatever they can
to assist and it's just
one of those things but we are in the
hands of new south wales health in this
regard but we're
this is such a tight-knit community on
the northern beaches
must really be strong how's it going
you're already strong after all sir
you know it then it's julio so we'll
just deal with it move on
um they're hoping it doesn't happen to
them obviously and it doesn't ruin their
christianity
but for those who are having to isolate
because they're in close contact
christmas this is a really popular
tourist area at this time of year
you know council's got um safe plans in
the summer safety plans
we've got additional resources for
beaches we have additional resources
for our open space and people are
largely doing the right thing so i think
as long as they maintain it i think it's
just unfortunately what's happened
i'm sure we'll get on top of it
immediately our residents are doing that
i think they're getting their tests
um we've got numerous plans in place to
deal with this
in terms of maintaining social distance
looking at crowd control working with
the police working with
additional resources so i'm positive
that we'll we'll get through it all
right
i need to find the kids though you are
not the kids there is
sewage testing that's taken place that
seems to indicate this is
a new virus or new outbreak i should say
how important
is it to find the source of this
outbreak
i think it's critical i think that helps
us um get under control very quickly and
you know we've seen these sometimes in
the past they've been fantastic they're
enjoying the concern so again we work
hand in glove with them and and
give them whatever resources they need
so obviously
were you just reporting then seven
o'clock tonight
[Music]
getting resources and finding out what's
wrong and where it is
on top of it you'll never know your rate
pay is your local community there
stay positive and um go and get tested
if you've got any symptoms
and maintain that social distance
maintaining everything that you were
doing right
at the beginning of this year when we
first got stuck in this lockdown just
maintain that social distancing maintain
the um the hand washing maintain the
the the the things
again we're just gonna maintain a lot
easier to deal with
we are largely so i think i'm positive
we'll get through this but um
um vigilant okay michael regan thank you
so much for taking the time to speak to
us
i much appreciate it thank you
queensland has just updated its
restrictions for people who've been to
sydney's northern beaches from midday
tomorrow
anyone who was in the northern beaches
region will not be able to visit
queensland care centres hospitals
health further officials
could be announced depending on what
happens
let's move over to wa where passengers
on board a flight from sydney to perth
say
they've been told otherwise it would
just be quarantined one day
after they say police
boarded the flight shortly after it
landed in perth and made the
announcement
the news comes as five cases of covert
19 have been diagnosed through new south
wales in the past two days
but earlier today the wa premier mark
mcgowan said flights from sydney would
continue to arrive in perth
and he was waiting on clarity from new
south wales authorities
authorities are yet to confirm any
official change to wa's
border arrangements let's just check in
the show move on to other news and the
federal treasurer says australia's
economy has rebounded faster than
expected from the pandemic
with unemployment set to return to
pre-coronavirus levels in four years
the budget update shows that
unemployment is expected to peak at
seven and a half percent next year
says 85 of australians who lost their
jobs
also their working at the houses
of the crisis are now back at work we
have come a long way
a long way from treasury's initial
estimate
that the unemployment rate could reach
or 15 percent i should talk to tess and
find out how
this improved terribly bad things
unprecedented i want to make sure that
we get the economic
hide and seek thing taken care of the
morrison government hello
has committed 251 billion dollars
in direct economic support already
over 138 billion dollars has
flowed to households and businesses
the economy appears to be rebounding
quicker than the government expected
with
the record deficit of 214 billion
dollars now revised down
to 198 billion dollars the shadow
treasurers has told patricia carvelis
the better than expected figures are a
result of restrictions easing
and soaring iron oil prices so that
looks like a hating care coalition
those improvements are welcome there you
are but they don't tell them a full
story
we do need a perspective on what's been
released today they're still almost a
million unemployed
uh more than a million underemployed
another ninety thousand expected to lose
their job between now and march
a week wages growth there's a whole list
of issues uh even in today's budget
update which should concern us and which
should be the focus of the government
does label believe the job keeper should
be extended given
hundreds of thousands of australians
have come off in the last few months
at least do you have an interesting call
we've been saying for some time we've
been very consistent and what the
government has said today is
and have a sort of an arbitrary cut off
honestly with the economy and the labor
market's weaker than they anticipated
and they should be
uh have the flexibility what specific
additional city of them do you want for
people with a large number already
underemployed reading books well first
of all maintaining that flexibility
around job keeper is important i think
uh
giving people who are on job seeker uh a
sense of the
the future of the job seekers kids
around here
so that people don't spend christmas
worried about how they'll
live on forty dollars a day if that's
the rate it returns to in march
well that's jim chalmers speaking to
patricia carvelis earlier for more i'm
joined by
dr brendan wren who's the chief
economist at kpmg
dr rin thank you so much for your time
so the economy is rebounding quicker
than it is check the nearby forest
and look i think it is here
back up so really what we're seeing is
a recession really because of the supply
side of the economy that government shut
down
much of elements of the economy so that
we could manage the corona virus
outbreak within this country as we've
now been able to open the
particularly from the consumer side and
so that's now starting to flow its way
back through the economy what could i
have missed so we had a sharp
contraction in the june quarter
lots of the economy got shut down and
now it's rebounded within the september
quarter and continuing
to do so as the economy opens up and
people start to spend together sneaky
burgers unemployment
is the key indicator that the rba is
looking at when assessing the health of
the economy the really
dire forecasts of double-digit
unemployment those haven't materialized
and are unlikely to
based on these mye phone numbers i think
that the peak is now seven and a half
percent in the first quarter of next
year
that's correct but when you they're
those numbers that are looking at the
pure definition of unemployment
if you have a look at an extended
definition of unemployment
those people that are technically
employed but working zero hours
those people that are underemployed and
also those people that
in essence fell out of the labor market
i believe that there was a chance of a
job
they did have effective unemployment
that wasn't there
that is actually starting to come back
down now and there is strength returning
to the labor market but it will take
some time yeah i'd like to come back by
evening
virus levels hiding around these numbers
that fewer people are on job keeper than
the government predicted and so the cost
of the wage subsidy scheme is now
estimated to be
90 billion dollars how will that play
out when the scheme
ends in march next year and i can't see
what the government's really trying to
do
is see that the economy lifts naturally
and creates demand for new employment
and bringing people back into the labor
market
effectively to deliver goods and
services within our community
as the economy naturally recovers what
you should be doing is seeing
a fall within the labor support programs
or wage support programs
that are being gotten by the government
so as
they fall away we should actually
hopefully
not see much of a ripple effect through
the economy that between the both of
those effects they even their way out
i mean that's an ideal situation how
that actually
plays out in practice we still need to
wait and see
really as to how strong the economy is
at the end of march
a booming iron ore price is also keeping
uh
the books going given so much of our
economic prosperity is linked to china's
continued
demand for our iron ore do you foresee
any problems with that
um the iron oil price is at record highs
about 155 us dollars a ton
within the budget itself it's still
anticipating that it will fall back down
to about
55 us by the end of the september
quarter of next year
personally i think that that's unlikely
we haven't seen
that average level of iron oil prices
since about 2015.
um china uses our iron ore to help
grow its economy as it's undertaking
fiscal stimulus
that's not going to change the demand
for iron ore
um from china is will be quite strong
within the medium term
and the supply will iron or glow
um in brazil the second largest supply
of iron ore
uh due both to um still issues to do
with production
um in ballet mines plus also the corona
virus
taking hold within that country so iron
oil prices
are likely to stay high for an extended
period of time
which still which will flow through our
general economic effects as well as the
budget as well so we're seeing this
outbreak on sydney's northern beaches
how
critical is it that state borders remain
open for
australia are they kids hiding
um well i think the the issue with state
borders
also reflects about trying to contain
the spread of the virus so that we don't
have to go into large lockdown periods
again more broadly
the the continuation of you know
interstate trade is obviously very vital
for economic activity particularly in
the services sector
where you're looking to see tourism
return i'm
really tempted to just feel this because
any borders is going to have a material
effect on that part of the patients to
try to find this last year
i think the containment of should we be
able to contain
this outbreak in the northern beaches of
sydney um
that will really ensure the fact that
we're not needing to go into any further
lockdown measures
and further dampen any economic activity
that otherwise is now starting to
rebound in a relatively strong way
going into next year if we look ahead
what are the potential points of
weakness in the australian economy we
know that
international migration has been such a
big driver of economic growth
in australia's history and that's likely
to stay
very low so that's true so we're still
getting
virtually no international tourism
within australia so the services sector
within australia is still quite weak
we need a return to tourist activity
so that we can get a bounce in sectors
like
accommodation and food arts and
recreation well don't tell me that this
has an important role to play
in returning um though
where they were before there's still a
large amount
i couldn't find um
trying to encourage domestic tourism
within australia
is a really important element and many
of the policies that you're seeing
implemented by state governments
including
voucher systems to go and spend within
regional economies
are incredibly important to help
strengthen that sector
as well um but that's probably where the
major weaknesses
lie you are starting to see thank you
for today
the
is where the weakness is probably most
pronounced still okay okay brendan
good to get your thoughts thanks much as
i generally try to avoid
looking
500 police were destroyed across nine
public housing towers in melbourne
three thousand residents were ordered
under immediate
hard lockdown with no warning with some
being detained
the sudden nature of the lockdown was
problematic
she found that the decision to lock down
immediately was made without
direct public health advice
like the virus it sought to contain the
immediacy of the lockdown
risked the health and well-being of me
victoria's expert on infectious diseases
acting as chief health officer that day
although she signed the lockdown
directions the timing
the state government apologized to the
public housing tower residents
today the victorian government has come
out defending its actions
housing ministers should win maintaining
the government did not act illegally
while acknowledging it was a difficult
decision and one that caused distress
to the residents he maintained the
government had no choice with
the virus raging and that while it was a
difficult decision
it was made to save lives here's some of
what he had to say
earlier today we have got uh
3 000 people who lock down across those
nine towers
uh we've got some people who are very
very severely health compromised
uh and i think the call that was made
absolutely the right call
2000 uh ensure the safety of oh yeah
we make no apology for saving people's
lives
absolutely no apology for saving
people's lives today the deputy chief
health officer alan cheng has also come
out responding to the report
saying that there was a sense of
the best thing you can do right now the
fact that 10 percent
ultimately became infected with the
virus but he admitted authorities could
have been better prepared
let's bring you breaking news now
western australia's premier mark mcgowan
has announced
anyone who has been in new south wales
since last
friday wa will have to self
quarantine immediately
requirements are that they and anyone
they foreign with will have to be tested
for clover 19
within 24 hours
as soon as possible and the group of
people that are required to present the
clover 19 test
in the next
police have ordered a flight that had
arrived from sydney into perth
this afternoon and had told people that
they needed to have a covert 19 test and
that they would need to sell quarantine
until that test came back negative which
is true
to anyone who has arrived from new south
wales into perth since
december the 11th mark mcgowan has put
out a statement
on history
after consultation with him our
authorities
will keep you across the details of that
story
well the trial of a northern territory
police officer charged with the murder
of an indigenous teenager in central
australia will be relocated from alice
springs to darwin
samantha joshua reports it was a short
hearing this morning at the northern
territory supreme court
acting justice dean mildred handed down
his decision that the trial of constable
zacchaeus
would be moved from here in alice
springs to darwin
the constable death of indigenous
teenager clementine walker in the
central australian community of union
last year
the nt police officer has been committed
to stand trial at the alice springfield
council filed an application to have the
trial move to darwin
defense council's arguments for the move
have been suppressed
from the spurs mildred has allowed media
to report that the basis of the
application
was the level of pre-trial publicity and
comments on social media
as having the potential to risk the fair
trial of the accused
today acting justice mildred approved
that application
meaning the trial will be heard in
darwin 1500 kilometers from the intimate
community
he also said that there would be an abl
link at the proceedings here in alice
springs it's great that the family
has access to um
it's probably our best bet the trial has
been set down to start on the 19th of
july 2021
and is expected to last for five weeks
the matter returns to court
at the end of february a man shot dead
by queensland police on a motorway this
morning was previously investigated by a
counter-terrorism
task force and was wearing a gps
monitoring device
queensland police were called to the
local motorway at
drew vale south after reports from the
public
about someone walking on the road police
say he pulled a knife on officers
they say he was on bail and was stopped
from leaving the country last year
in 2019 we deceased who we suspect was
influenced by israel
attempted to depart from the
international airport for somalia
actually it was stopped arrested on
suspicion of an attempt as it's broken
[Music]
in june 2019 he was charged with further
offenses including refusing to hand over
my ass
to your mobile phone
[Music]
you might actually be able to pull this
off or acknowledge the authority of the
court
the applied form was granted bill on the
third of september of this year
the queensland joint counter-terrorism
team opposed bail in the grounds he
would interfere with witnesses
obstruct justice it's not growing
anymore why
a sydney swimming coach kyle daniels has
been found not guilty of five charges of
sexually abusing a young student
the jury has been asked to continue
deliberating
the other charges that say there is a
stalemate awesome it follows a lengthy
trial
[Music]
has been on trial here at the downing
center in sydney now for seven
weeks the 22 year old has pleaded not
guilty to 26 charges related to nine
the trial is heard the complainants were
aged between five and
ten at the time
which all related to one girl who was
aged seven at the time
and the charges he's been acquitted of
include multiple counts of sexual
the intercourse kara sheed has asked the
panel to return to the jury room
and keep deliberating on the remaining
21 charges related to
eight other girls but the panel has
indicated that they've been at a
stalemate
and that the disagreement is
during the course of this trial the
crown prosecutor accused mr daniels
of having an interest in children which
he was prepared to opportunistically
activate
his own sexual gratification but his
defense team has highlighted
inconsistencies
suggested they might have been
unreliable and even suggested yeah they
could have been influenced by outside
sources like
media reports and things that they
opened from other parents
crews continue to battle the glaze
that's still burning under the fallen
roof
scientific units
air quality has varied obviously you saw
the
plumes of smoke yesterday that would
have been highly toxic
and the strength of the wind has kept uh
and dissipated that smoke over a large
area no you're not refueling heavy
equipment was brought into
the tent and extinguished the blaze
[Music]
[Applause]
recent rain has dampened much of the
bushfire affected areas with some
indications
the island is beginning
[Music]
and at nearby happy valley another close
quote
[Music]
queensland and rangers the
residents that stayed on in the valley
marriage as well managed to look after
their own properties
incredible incredible job they did those
resident firefighters now getting back
to them
there was a huge sense of relief the
next day
and there was some tears the island
opened it's
[Music]
with places like lake mackenzie as
perfect as ever
you know i'm not sure
i'm gonna go here and maybe register
some of them
period after being closed through covert
and the bushfire emergency
a lot of people come to frozen
frequently i'm getting from people that
actually support the local community but
also
registering in place of that authorities
say bushfire hotspots could smolder for
[Music]
let's register johanna marie abc news
fraser island harmonium
[Music]
now what does this do here are the top
stories
massively increased well that doesn't
matter for this
cause 15 additional damage and reach the
skill power by 15
that's pretty awesome 12 new cases were
diagnosed today
in new south wales since last friday
will have to self-corresponding
latest i am not going to register that
right and anyone they quarantine with
will have to be tested for covert 19
within 24
the treasury says hours will return to
pre-k 19 levels in four years time
as the economy rebounds faster than
expected from there
has been revised down to and ninety
years
in part due to soaring iron oil prices
josh did you let me register uh another
item then that's cool
fiji's prime minister says more than 95
of fiji's population is said to be
affected by the oncoming tropical
cyclone
cafe mining rama is warning the category
5 storm could easily surpass the
record-breaking
horse is not there which killed at least
people well let's see australia is off
to a strong starting point
india at the adelaide over which we've
done that later a center opening for
right now
hope you enjoy thanks for watching and i
will see you next
before pat cummins took another wicket
for the home side a short time ago the
visitors were two
for 71.
[Music]
so a number of states have updated their
restrictions for people who have been to
sydney's northern beaches
so that northern beaches cluster has now
risen to 17 people with 12
new cases being diagnosed today so from
midday tomorrow anyone who has been in
the northern beaches region will not be
able to visit queensland's residential
aged care centers hospitals
or correctional facilities tasmanian
authorities have issued a travel
election
my name is we have some more things to
create last week being told
we also have a few cutscenes we need to
check out health authorities
some people that are in the right areas
of rivals will have
their entry past they'll have to reapply
and confirm they haven't visited the
high risk locations
and wa has announced
[Music]
hello oh that's true on board a flight
from
perth they've been told they will have
to turn around one day after being
tested
19. police reportedly shortly after they
landed in perth and made the
announcement that's the plan
news comes
ladies and gentlemen
while your aircraft has been in the air
there's been some changes to our
legislation here in wa
in relation to the question about that
okay but the good news is and i'll get
straight to that it's not 14 days
okay
we have had some positive cases
which we can't ignore obviously all
right so it's amazing
every week at church right i'm really
sorry about it now that you mentioned
that we've got a ton of police here to
process you as you can
throw them please
[Music]
very quick get your tests and then
you're right to do whatever you want
providing you're negative
obviously and you're right to do
whatever you want and have a great
christmas
um okay so let's just recap the breaking
news the northern beaches
cluster has grown to 17 cases so there's
another
12 cases that have been added onto that
total current
earlier today
for all residents from the spit to palm
beach
work from home and remain at home as
much as possible so this is from new
south wales health
not to visit friends or relatives in
aged care facilities or hospitals unless
it's essential
to avoid unnecessary gatherings to keep
to your household group
and to avoid visiting high-risk venues
including clubs restaurants
places and gyms would you like
unnecessary
travel outside the northern beaches
quite helpful as a reference region as
that is there a difference between
churches
there's nothing fundamentally different
however the actions the churches
[Music]
will also need to be tested anyway i'll
be taking that time period very much so
that is the latest youtubers
on those numbers from the northern beach
thank you i'll be going now in
sydney we'll bring you more details see
you again sophie the federal treasurer
says australia's economy is recovering
faster than expected but the load ahead
is very challenging
the budget update shows the unemployment
rate is expected to peak at seven and a
half percent
next year and return to pre-closing
levels in about four years
the record deficit of 214 billion
dollars
has been revised down to 198 billion
in part because of soaring iron prices
the treasurer josh weidenberg has told
patricia carvelis
while sharing iron oil prices have
contributed the government
has actually taken a prudent assumption
on the future of iron oil prices
i don't really promise very often around
150 dollars need to do so
a ton us we have assumed that that
will fall to around 55 a ton
by september of next year and we've
always done that when it comes
to budget for us knowing that when it
comes to the sensitivity analysis
the impact of higher high oil prices
to the economic bottom line there are
some glaring emissions in today's
figures
including the future of job seeker the
unemployment benefit
that extra top-up money as you know is
only available until
march what's going to happen with the
future of that payment treasurer
this outfit is very well as you say
the coronavirus supplement has been
extended to march
and it has provided a vital i can't just
stand around here
to say we need to go work on this all
been doing enough
and have been out of work we'll
obviously continue to monitor the labor
market but the best thing that we can do
for those people who are on job seeker
are to get them into work
and one example of the program that
they've announced
to do exactly now is the job maker
hiring credit
which is focused on young people age
who have been unemployed um but who do
need that additional incentive to an
employer to take them on another tourism
a week for an employer takes one of
those
conversations here uh reduce um the
number of people who are on job seekers
there's no doubt that there are other
programs something important to do
your own figures out today it's going to
take four years till we get depressed
uh employment
[Music]
recessions
[Laughter]
six years and with the 1990s recession
first we're going to go back in here
i'm very hopeful that the labour market
still continues
with its current trends to happen and
today we saw the unemployment rate
pk fall down to six point eight percent
so sorry
we saw nine and new jobs being created
before the time and we saw strong sure
why did you do this stuff
in victoria poison on the yard
fiji has been placed under a
is a nationwide 5 star that could easily
surpass and that's where you come in so
i need to make me some fertilizer so the
flowers will grow again
also it needs to work instantly and it's
super effective
for these latest superstars
the world is getting warmer i'll be sure
to pull out the voice myself i'm getting
stronger
i see in that case i'll make it much
more okay
well for more i'm joined by elizabeth
who's the director general at fiji red
cross thank you so much
for your time we're expecting this
cyclone to make landfall in the next
couple of hours can you tell us what
it's like there now
oh this is thanks sophie i should be
able to grow flowers in my yard again
a lot of strongholds too
i told you i'll take care of that myself
[Music]
the recent ones we've been receiving are
that uh
they've set up about 53 evacuation
centers already that has uh here you go
well this is about
one thousand five hundred uh forgotten
part
already located in the different
divisions
um all right and what is that no
but they've been uh this time uh well uh
prepared and with school holidays it's
made it a lot easier to
set up the schools for evacuation
centers and government
and it is something that can be dropped
a list of uh evacuation centers
and uh and how people could identify
which ones were the closest to that
i should check it's a lot more or better
organized
at this time and people identifying the
evacuation center in new york these
things
here is this whole process made
easier by the fact that there aren't
tourists there
at the moment um
well i'm just feeling
but uh
okay uh it's just the way that it has
been uh
prepared uh the whole national
preparation
scale i bet as far as we know so uh it's
interesting i would say
what have locals been telling you about
and concerns leading up to this storm at
the higher level
yes after we um um
our volunteers and you're receiving uh
just
uh
a lot of them have not fully recovered
from tc winston
and a lot of people have been uh
their family resources yeah it was
affected by the company i'm hoping at
the grocery store so i'm here to take an
order going back to community center
the anxiety of what they're that much
going through
christmas period is uh as soon as your
income from your outlet is worse than i
expected
is that why you're working at the
grocery store no that's wrong
that's not it at all 44 people when it
comes to people
i apologize for jumping to conclusions
so quickly
no it sounds very serious they're pretty
terrible sometimes and the interesting
questions we're just talking to people
on the ground you might say that but
you're still helping
[Music]
[Laughter]
the crying and the anxiety
is very evident
[Music]
infrastructure damages so uh a lot of it
will be okay that's the red cross we are
really concerned with the
family home thank you for coming and how
the excess good clean
water is good to hop in the accessor
and is one of the other big concerns as
well is that there will be more cyclones
over the summer
[Music]
this is supposed to be just one of the
four that is supposed to come during
this season
so you're expecting another three you
can turn in this potentially big
cyclones
potentially category five cyclones this
season um
well we've been told that uh we have to
expect
four cycles this season um
[Music]
what assistance is australia providing
if any
let's see as we were very closely with
the australian red cross
and then they've been providing ongoing
support for us throughout
the international federation of red
cross all right
and also a lot of support for the
international
um
and that you're able to do the very
important work that you're doing
elizabeth thanks so much that's
a bunch of stuff there thank you so much
well let's just recap
has now grown to 17 cases so another 12
new cases have been added to the five
that we heard about earlier today
there is also a
such as restaurants and gyms they won't
be allowed to visit
they really need anything else aged care
centers unless it's absolutely
essential so this is news that's just
coming in another 12 cases on top of the
five that we heard about earlier today
bringing that cluster to 17. wa has
already changed its advice in relation
to
residents from those flying into wa
they will now have to self quarantine
for a day
and be covert 19 tested
as negative and that has been back dated
to
last friday december queensland has been
tokyo has recorded
[Music]
travel see the fans such a good girl
good luck
for your friends
[Music]
visitors
many japanese
will be strained if the infection
certainly they're really pushing
socializing during new year's
secrets quietly
[Music]
with an eye on the economy the
government persisted with the scheme
somewhere during the holiday period it
sounds rough
anyway you wanted my order right
spending good really okay to give it to
you
however this year is spreading in
regionally
we need to reduce big gatherings in
cities like tokyo and osaka
restaurants are still doing all they can
to encourage customers to keep
coming in as safely as possible some
are delivering food by roads and it's
nighttime by the time we get there so
let's just head back to the outside
shop serves its food and drinks with
disposable face shields so customers can
continue
eating and drinking uninterrupted do
this after helping
the grocery store wow i can't even craft
until
jake stoomer abc news
australia's pacemen have made a strong
start to the opening test
against india in adelaide at lunch the
visitors were two for 41 and they
haven't made much headway since
barack holy is at the crease for his one
and only test
in australia this summer india won the
toss and chose to bash but opener pretty
short
lasted all the orders before mitchell
thank you you really haven't didn't take
pat cummings long after that
oscar off
[Music]
it doesn't seem like he's goofing off
somewhere in town so he must be going
outside of town
it reminds me i saw him before when i
went to go gathering
really well we're well into the festive
season and
it's the charity that many people this
is my thanks to charity
whether it's clothing goods or monetary
contributions
not all donations are helpful and that's
wise to do
also when it comes back christian
siebert from the center for social
impact at swinburne
university thank you so much for your
time tonight
just tell us how people's giving habits
have changed
this year because of the pandemic
so good evening good good evening to
your viewers so australians are
religiously
people we um we gave 10.5 billion
dollars to charity dragon medicine for
the most developed
recently only having one of those
indications this year
[Music]
um sort of fundraising events had to be
cancelled that sort of thing
just pressure on charity make sure it's
probably used in something else
but we've also seen things like creating
donations through online platforms like
gofundme
so there's a real mix in terms of what's
happening but
as you said christmas is one of the most
um it is the most popular scene
for australians in terms of donating
towards charities i can make that
people haven't bought gifts yet is that
something that they should consider
make that into a charity it makes you
better armor lots of different things
you can do
you can obviously you know um do things
such as um
[Music]
you can also do whether it's christmas
or a birthday or
some other special occasion
on facebook for example and ask your
friends to contribute until they see
what's your name
that's important to you as well and
there have been
um so many scams who have been
verified
[Music]
asked to donate just to an organisation
the website australia's national
charities regulator the hcnc
um www.hcmc.gov
they've got a please change out the
refuel bottle for the magicians
just to get information about what it
does that sort of thing
um but not all charities and you need
but also it's important to read the um
the fine print
particularly say if you are i wonder if
they're playing playing
such as facebook um we saw that there
were some
issues in relation to that some
confusion um with
celeste really successful um
during the bushfire crisis so it's
really important to read the fine print
and the last thing i would say as well
is the
[Music]
um and they're not really happy when
money is spent on administration costs
or overheads
but that's a really important
[Music]
you know be happy that some of their
funds are being spent on them
[Applause]
it's actually pretty much the eyes
located over the center of the island so
it's the northern ireland
it is producing wind gusts in excess of
200 kilometers
flooding waterfall is expected it slowly
starts to move away during friday
morning
but that's from the eastern parts of the
country will feel the uh impacts of this
system
now we've also got severe conditions
across many parts of
australia victoria new south wales
queensland severe thunderstorm
warnings are in place this is associated
with heavy rainfall
in association with these thunderstorms
we've got a very unstable and humid
i think which is what's triggering those
heavy falls has been flash flooding
through parts of new south wales and
southeast queensland again today
um the northern territory this is due to
the monsters
heavy rainfall and damaging winds and
also absolutely high tides across the
region
and that's as i said due to the monsoon
trough is going to continue to deepen
we could see a low pressure system
forming to the west of the northern
territory
and that should bring some heavy
rainfall down into the kimberley and the
flood watch has already been issued
severe thunderstorms also pushing up
through new south wales and queensland
okay thanks very much graeme well coming
up we will bring you more details on
that
which has now grown to 17 cases a stay
home order
is now in place for three days for
residents from the spit
to palm beach they are being told to
work from home
only to undergo essential travel and not
together in
high risk places such as gyms
and then this one to visit hospitals
we'll bring you more
in the next hour stay with us
[Music]
actually let's see watch abc news live
streams
anytime on abc eye view keep up to date
with the latest
breaking stories from around the corner
and across the globe
and you can catch up on all your
favorite abc news and current affairs
which is what i needed the eye view and
live stream abc news now
monday poe speaks to stan i knew it
worked to my advantage
what i looked like i've never really
identified as being
female or asian you just wanna do an
interesting
[Music]
rivals thing
supreme court live at the grounds
grandstand summer of cricket live on abc
radio and the abc listen app
[Applause]
[Music]
the women's national basketball league
this weekend on abc in eye view
and that
i just can't take my eyes i just can't
take my heart
okay so what we'll do next
[Music]
so these are generic so we'll do that
okay
then let's start the abc
belongs to you something like the abc
gives you a sense of national pride
radio australia if you'd like to join us
the abc is very much a part of
australian culture
for the opening night
the abc has been around for as long as
anyone who was alive remembers
crowds are sharing look look
look at me um
did you hear that
it's been now since my childhood
[Music]
it gives voice to all of us the abc has
always been
[Music]
17 to the area
the last couple of days has been a very
telling reminder that we are living in
the middle of the pandemic
[Music]
well i guess i'll have to use one of
these
which is red signs of recovery the
treasurer flags a smaller budget deficit
and growth in the economy what materials
should i use
a category five cyclone
[Music]
[Applause]
and a strong start for australia in the
first test against india two early
wickets for the home center
yellow then
[Applause]
hello welcome to abc news i'm gonna be
this is really okay the northern beach
is covered instead
has grown to a totally
is asking that for the next three days
residents in the northern beaches
local government area take a lift
work from home and remain at home as
much as possible
not to visit friends or relatives in
aged care facilities or
hospitals unless it's essential to avoid
unnecessary gatherings
and to keep to your household and avoid
visiting high-risk venues including
clubs restaurants
places of worship gyms and avoid
unnecessary travel
outside the northern beaches area
[Applause]
well just as we were preparing to
celebrate the back of
2020 today is the wake-up call that
we're still living in a pandemic
some states have begun to introduce some
travel restrictions
with fears the holiday plans of
thousands of people could be ruined
a week before christmas many would have
been expecting to cure the shops
not for a clover test there we go but as
the number of confirmed cases
climbs the line for a swab swells
not good
for a handful this is their second
attempt at testing
ah hang down all these right dude for
two hours
we waited till about here 9 30 then they
had to cut it off
among the new infections are a worthless
retirement village in her 50s
her partner
those three but those are probably
[Music]
rsl last friday the penrose
and the club a day later
anyone who was there at the same time
should be swapped
these people who come forward have come
forward as heroes to put themselves
there and to be tested
and translated that could include
spending christmas
in self-isolation for some everyone at
the avalon rsl
at any time last friday has been ordered
to isolate for two weeks
they test negative that's because three
of the cases were there that day
source of the infection we need to find
the source of creations
and feel more confident that we have it
under control
so i don't spend too much time worrying
about new south wales
lots of life i bet i can do that it'll
only shut its border
if the situation in sydney worsens the
action that we take will be based on
what intelligence we can get that maybe
involve
creation naming geographic hot spots the
west
is also waiting for health advice if we
need to we'll put up a hard border with
new south wales
i realize that would be very upsetting
very upsetting
for many people passengers arriving in
perth late today
[Music]
there we go unfortunately while your
aircraft has been in the air there's
been some changes to our legislation
here in wa
in relation to quarantining okay but the
good news is and i'll get stronger okay
that is the first one
not the christmas surprise travelers are
counting on
ronnie heyman abc power okay
okay we'll bring you more on the
situation shortly when we speak
to our reporters in perth and sydney for
a live
update but let's take a look at the
station
because a number of them have updated
their restrictions for people
who have been to sydney's beaches so
from midday tomorrow
anyone who was in the northern beaches
region will not be able to visit
queensland's
residential campus hospitals or
correctional facilities
tasmanian authorities have issued a
travel alert for specific
locations with people who have visited
venues in the last week being told to
stop
isolated and contact public health
authorities
future new south wales arrivals will
have their entry pass
to tasmania cancelled they'll have to
reapply
and confirm they haven't visited the
high risk
and wa's premier has announced anyone
who has been in new south wales since
last friday
will have to self quarantine immediately
he says the latest requirements
are those individuals yeah this is
actually going to mess things up a lot
but that's okay i don't care within 24
[Music]
benefit hours at the same time
australia's economy is rebounding from
the coronavirus crisis
with new figures today confirming 90 000
jobs were created
in the last schools of creation treasury
is now forecasting the economy grow this
financial year not shrink
as predicted in october's budget
political editor andrew probing explains
the australian economy is rebounding
strongly one of the blackest years in
generations
now slightly less red what's this year's
deficit
14 billion dollars now expected to come
in
under 200 pages now the economy is now
expected to grow
this financially
just 10 weeks ago there is a lot at the
end of the tunnel
but there is still a very long way
to go the improvement down to soaring
iron oil prices
caused by china's hungry stimulus
spending
and fewer people being dependent on
construction of wage subsidies
90 000 jobs were created in november
full time
which came out of long lockdown the
unemployment rate
falling to 6.8 per cent it's not about
just numbers
on the page it's about millions of
australians who can't disappoint
perth man steve carter was part of the
november jobs boom
after being made redundant in july it
makes you feel pretty horrible
without though particularly when i live
alone so i win
one income to no income for the
household
he applied for 70 jobs before landing
permanent work
it was awesome the treasurer says it
will be another four years before
unemployment reaches pre-code
levels the decision on a permanent
increase to job seeker the
unemployment benefit through this one
over here there is 1.5 million
australians relying on that payment
and this government is happy to kick the
can down the road
australia's island advantage was used in
what's been
successful massively expensive
economic response new south wales ruby
princess embarrassment and
victoria's second wave disaster
territories get their contact tracing up
to speed
and though they'll be here there are
reasons to be optimistic about the new
year
the vaccine rollout in early 2021 would
cement the
economic recovery andrew probing abc
news
canberra the share market jumped two or
ten months ago
by strong employment data and the
government's improving economic outlook
i think it's
probably about as good as i'm gonna get
plenty of good news today in the
official jobs figures aside from the
fact that the jobless rate itself has
come down to better than expected 6.8
total employment is now just 1.1 percent
lower and still lots of life which is
all i care about
it's down just 0.4
and no longer being told to stay home
the data indicates workers and
businesses are relying less and less on
government supports
like job keeper as consumer spending and
general activity picks up
the federal budget update today shows
the drop in job
demand as an 11 billion dollar wind fall
[Applause]
this chart shows new home sales were
already at a decade
from the order good luck trying to get a
tradie the positive news today
aussie dollar also just below 76
cents now the aussies also been helped
by the federal reserve overnight
reiterating its plan to keep
rates near zero and to continue to pump
billions into the us economy
has made bitcoin even more attractive as
somewhere to park money
yet another record for the crypto
overnight
surpassing twenty one thousand us
dollars is your sitting
book i guess that's finance victorian
ombudsman has found
the sudden hard lockdown of nine public
housing towers in the midst of
melbourne's
covered outbreak breached human rights
that's it for now
deborah glass says while the decision
hope you enjoy
thanks for watching i will see you next
time
something on which the government is
refusing to budge
when the public housing towers in north
melbourne and flemington were locked
down
five months ago it made headlines across
the world
this apartment block is one of nine
where residents are banned from leaving
without warning more than 3 000 people
were locked inside their homes
in a bid to contain a coronavirus
outbreak
tower resident hussein wasn't allowed
out for two weeks
and was only given half an hour's notice
from a journalist welcome back to
let's play at least my name is kirsten
there was five
let's see another
item felt like they were good
now an investigation by the state's
watchdog
rapid lockdown to risk people's health
and well-being
in my opinion the immediacy of it was
not compatible
with the results including the right
to humane treatment when deprived of
living
or the opinion uh from the ombudsman
multi-attack one and we save people's
lives the report also found
the rush decision was not based on
health advice
which recommended the lock down
to enable planning for essential
services are healed
instead people were left alone
that's very useful highlighted uh a lot
of inhuman
degrading and we'll see what that does
the acting chief health officer signed
the lockdown directions
the timing was not on her advice what
kind of stuff she had less than 15
years do we have anything else that we
need to try to make we need to get
applications clearly you know um
things could have been done better that
could have been better preparation
these people have been treated abysmally
they are vulnerable
despite criticizing that they don't need
it for anything
it did find that it was needed and it
did successfully contain the outbreak
it should
materials thank government to publicly
apologize to the residents
for the way they were treated green
things
there now let's see if we certainly
absolutely
[Music]
abc news melbourne
now the coronavirus outbreak in sydney's
northern beaches region
ursula malone is on our own avalon for
us tonight and ronnie heyman is at
sydney airport
ursula let's start with you scream here
tell us about the latest
infections um
well twelve new infections children all
the infections have been identified on
the northern beach
in addition to the five cases we already
knew about
so that makes 17 cases
northern beaches now new south wales
health authorities are still
trying to trace the source of these
infections
they've said that they don't believe
this virus has been quietly
circulating in the community over a long
period of time
and that's because tested from the area
on december the 10th
tested negative but certainly the virus
has been spreading over the last six
days we now know
so we can possibly expect to see more
cases identified
[Music]
okay
[Applause]
are being asked to work from home where
possible
and to avoid socializing to stay home
as much as possible and to avoid
travelling
and people from other parts of sydney
obviously
where possible stay away from this area
okay ronnie heyman is at sydney airport
ronnie are there any new travel
restrictions from the city
um well there is so western australia
has said that
any news anyone traveling or who has
arrived
so that means that people leaving here
at sydney airport tonight to go to perth
will be required to get tested on
arrival uh as they get
to i think it really matters too much
isolation
australia has said that they will
provide further updates in the next
24 to 48 hours so obviously with this
rapidly changing situation there's also
other restrictions that have been used
in
queensland now they have said that
residents who
or anyone who is has arrived in
queensland from the northern beaches
area
will be required will not be allowed
rather to go
to hospitals they won't be allowed to go
to asia opportunities
and they won't be allowed to go to
correctional facilities now that's
anyone who's arrived there
since last friday so really there is
a number of changes that have already
been implemented
i'm not going to end up with these here
i'm just kind of planning that there's
another outbreak
saddens me but here's what it is we
don't really know what's happening
and we want to get the cans and we would
think yes
i'm just excited and maybe
[Music]
so we're a week out from christmas
almost uh and it's looking as if there
is
a number of things that are already
changing so it's an anxious way to see
exactly how this is going to go so you
can put
these like going
[Music]
testing clinics as this news has been
filtering through
in the last few hours so we'll get the
latest
shortly here on the abc news channel the
first repatriation flight from paris has
touched down
in darwin this morning the qantas plane
with 146 people on board including
three infants landed at darwin's rwaf
base
they've been taken to the howard springs
quarantine facility
it comes as a further two people test
positive to coronavirus at howard
springs
and 16 year old girl arrived on a flight
from chennai in
india on tuesday since repatriation
flights began
around 1800 people have arrived in
darwin with 35 of them
yes the best one for this is the next
repatriation flight will come from
london and is due to arrive on the 30th
grow great materials that's what we want
an investigation has been ordered at a
hospital in the southern highlands
after it failed to diagnose a patient's
brain cancer
even after anything else emergency mike
atwell died
five weeks after visiting barrel
hospital where he was given the all
clear in april
his widow is speaking i guess we can do
that i don't think anything else really
matters
but we can throw it on there this will
be a tough christmas for gal atwell and
her family she's considered
her husband mike by her side he was my
best friend
put it that way and uh and we shared a
great deal together
to her husband of 40 years after he
passed away from a brain cancer in june
the onset of symptoms five weeks earlier
sophia
the barrel hospital emergency department
oscar they found nothing thanks for
taking
care of me here's my thanks he said
there's something
the last time in an ambulance with his
family asking no
detail examination apparently to be told
to visit a g43
family friend took her husband to the
sydney based in liberty
[Music]
side slipping which doesn't work in case
of misdiagnosis at barrel hospital in 18
months
earlier this year abc revealed two
separate patients were sent home
despite suffering from potentially
deadly aneurysms
today i'll be writing to the world that
sophie is going to be able to use
that may just be an investigation into
this hospital of course
barrel and district hospital has
apologized to the family
saying southwestern sydney local health
district is taking the matter very
seriously
it keeps repeating them mr atwell's
families lodged an official submission
to a parliamentary review into the state
of regional hospitals and healthcare
the inquiry is still taking submissions
from christianity until mid-january
what can we swap out here our family and
of course how many other
patients that wonder if anyone else can
use the magician's situation i wonder if
it's
so cool atwell is willing to have god
says there
is josh babis abc news sydney sophie
police on brisbane's logan motorway this
morning was on bail and had been accused
of terrorist links
police say the officers who shot were
not aware of the ice bomb
it's prompted calls for an investigation
into the police's use of people
the morning commute brought to a
deadliest 72 year old
was reported walking through the traffic
on brisbane's busy logan motorway
about 6am police have
[Music]
shot multiple times despite attempts by
police to revive him
he died
police say he was on board monitoring
conditions
i can advise you that um we were
uh notified last night that there did
appear to be some tampering with that
tracking device
mr abdi was known to their
counter-terrorism unit
in may 2019 is influenced by islamic
state
attempted to depart brisbane
international airport for somalia
[Music]
foreign
i call on certain police who are
backgrounding journalists
to pump out as much untruthful
information
suggesting that he's got some terrorist
connections to stop
it's the fifth police shooting in
queensland in about three months
[Music]
occur on average in the whole of the
country in a year
the case is now in the hands of the
coroner the actions of police will be
subject to internal
and independent investigations george
roberts abc news brisbane
sydney swim coach kyle daniels has been
cleared of some child sections
of history of questions charges over his
alleged abuse of nine young girls during
lessons
at the mossman swim centre after a
seven-week trial the jury deliberated
from the
other day before acquitting him of five
of the charges
they related to one student aged seven
at the time
jurors told the judge there's a deadlock
on the remaining charges
deliberations tomorrow after being urged
to persevere
three canberrans including a lawyer and
an accountant will appear in court next
week over an alleged money laundering
scheme
the trio was arrested yesterday after
raids by accident
with money laundering dealing with the
process and recruiting people to
entertain
activity a 35 year old woman has been
charged with dealing with the proceeds
of crime and money laundering
two men held a series of meetings to
discuss how to launder the proceeds of
crime
all three
[Music]
and the strength of the wind has kept uh
dissipated today heavy equipment was
brought in to remove it
to extinguish the glaze there's
currently bud
results suitability for holding victoria
license is to be scrutinized after an
inquiry
after years of allegations and a recent
admission from
money laundering the state government is
appointing a special commissioner to run
the rule i can give you my extra
backpack
but critics have accused the premiere of
running a protection racket for crowd
and once their recently suspended
immediately
allegations of money laundering and
dodgy relationships with overseas junket
operators
crown casino for years welcome but a
shock admission to a new south wales
inquiry
casino there's another recipe
it will be fearless it will be properly
resourced it will be the right person
and they will get to the bottom of a
question that many people are asking
what's going on down there uh is it
being run to the highest of standards
are those that are back here are they
the right people to be doing
a special commissioner will be appointed
and the five years
whistleblowers and critics who have long
warned that victoria's gambling
commission
was a soft touch on the casino
new south wales has delayed granting a
license for the news
casino in sydney after council assisting
told the inquiry
the crown was not suitable to hold the
license to replace pressures
and western australian governments it
should lose its license in
perth it should lose its license in
melbourne and
sure as hell shouldn't be getting a
license in sydney at the very least
the license should be suspended
investigations
there are billions of dollars and
thousands of jobs writing on this review
and risk management today crown alerted
shareholders to the review
and said it would continue to engage
with a gaming regulator
richard willingham abc news where this
thing
is fraser island communities are
welcoming back visitors less than two
weeks after they were understood from a
major business
recent terrain has been touched that's
okay affected areas
let's see okay that is
iconic fraser island burnt right down to
the beach
it will take some time to recover from
this devastation
we need to do that the blaze can't
really believe it to see what it does
using rocks and at nearby happy valley
another close call the township was
saved by a group of volunteers
queensland fire and rescue and rangers
and these weren't done
yes it stayed on in the valley as well
their own property
incredible incredible job they did those
resident fire fighters now getting back
to their normal lives
there's a huge sense of nutrition next
day when the fire passed
um and there's some tears this week
tourists are returning to the famous
sites with places like
lake mackenzie as perfect as ever no
longer shrouded in smoke
we seem to be pretty lucky that
spiritual tears
yeah absolutely beautiful tourism
operators are relieved the island has
opened again they're hoping for a busy
christmas period
after being closed through covert and
the bushfire
but also see what's one of the most
beautiful parts of australia
authorities say bushfire hot spots could
smolder for weeks
just the little bit of rainfall that
we've had and a lot of the black areas
that are out there now
the green shoots coming through already
is incredible johanna marie
abc news fraser island inferior
time to check his brain creed you're
looking at some yeah these are just
trivial nothing here in queensland and
with a very humid air mass
the potential of heavy rainfall is going
to be a feature with those
we'll see a trough and the front moves
through new south wales a southerly wind
change rolling through
and that's going to help spark these
widespread showers and storms
although a little bit more likely around
central regions
showers and storms also possible through
many parts of queensland apart from the
south west
very heavy rainfall across the top end
this is as the monsoon trough has formed
we're also looking at the city and
northeast that's for damaging winds
heavy rainfall also the potential of
abnormally high tides
here are the top stories
12 new infections have been confirmed
after two days of extensive testing in
the region
alerts were issued for several venues
including the avalon rsl club on
december the 11th
the results of genome sequencing are
usually released tonight which
items they can put to use here
the treasurer says unemployment will
return to pre-coronavirus levels in four
years time as the economy rebounds
faster than expected from the pandemic
a record deficit of 214 billion dollars
has been revised down to one hundred
keeping an eye on the time you still got
plenty of time
it comes as the unemployment rate fell
to 6.8
last month with data revealing around 90
000 jobs were created
all right a powerful tropical cyclone
that's been dubbed a super storm is on
you'll head back
the country's prime minister says more
than 90 percent of the population will
be affected by tropical cyclone yasser
frank baini marama is warning the
category five storm
the record-breaking
[Music]
[Applause]
so we definitely want to make those and
australia is off to a strong start
in the first test again at the adelaide
oval
mitchell stark sent to opening batsman
creepy shaw back to the stands for a
duck
on just the second ball
for the home side short time ago india
was 3
4 100
the northern beach is covered nineteen
cluster has grown into
seventeen cases new south wales health
and then they can make better gathering
globes the next
three days those on the northern beaches
local government
areas for them to work from home
and remain at home as much as possible
not to visit
friends or relatives in aged care
facilities or hospitals unless it's
essential
sure it will avoid necessary gatherings
to their household group visiting high
risk
venues including clubs restaurants
places of worship
gyms and avoid unnecessary travel
outside
the northern beaches area it's
effectively a state home order
for residents in that region for the
next three days
at the same time a number of states have
updated their restrictions for people
shouldn't have yellow northern beaches
yeah so from midday tomorrow
anyone who was in the northern beaches
region will not be able to visit
queensland's residential aged care
centers hospitals
or correctional facilities actually
tasmanian authorities feel really cheap
here
specifically people who have visited
venues in the house
future new south wales arrivals will
have their entry pass
to tasmania cancelled they'll have to
reapply and confirm they haven't visited
and was premiere has announced anyone
who has been in new south wales since
last friday will happen for these anyway
those individuals as well as anyone they
can't believe it will have to be tested
for covert 19
within 24 hours and police will ensure
that that happens
it shouldn't matter here they return a
negative test
so passengers on board a flight from
sydney to perth were given that
information
that they will have to quarantine for
one day after being tested for covert
19. police boarded the flight
shortly after it landed in perth and
made the announcement
there
[Music]
ladies and gentlemen as you've been told
my name is brad robinson i'm a wa police
inspector
unfortunately while your aircraft has
been in the air there's made some
changes to our legislation here in wa
in relation to quarantining okay good
news
it's not 14 days okay it's a one-day
quarantine period
in that one day you
what you can do at the airport on the
way through all right so it's a one day
i think
honestly i think the state government's
been pretty good in relation to this
especially given the time of year but at
the end of the day we have had
some positive cases break out in new
south wales which we can't ignore
obviously
so it's about keeping our state safe so
i'm really sorry about the hold up with
you guys we've got a ton of police here
to process you as you come through
please have all your gdg passes
available okay because as you scan
through you'll get a one-day quarantine
put on them
where you must then there's 24 hours
quarantined so from the center right
here get your test done on the way
through okay
uh i don't think i can
all right so it's very quick it's very
quick
get your test done and then you're right
to do whatever you want providing you
negative
obviously and you're right to do
whatever you want and have a great
christmas
so that's wa police passengers on their
arrival
into perth this afternoon that will be
in place
for arrivals from sydney let's see 17
cases in that sydney northern beaches
cluster we will keep you across the
story over the course of the evening
the australian council of social service
says australia faces a crucial moment
and maintaining financial support for
those struggling during the pandemic
the government was praised for its early
action in adding a coronavirus
supplement to job keep
job seeker but those payments are now
being wounded
there's a danger australia could emerge
from the resources
i guess i won't be making fraser used to
be a long-haul truck driver
in the years since he's had to sell his
house and other assets to stay afloat
picking up part-time work and making
wooden items to sell at markers
he managed to keep his car but he
couldn't afford to keep it regularly
registered
until job seeker it meant that i was
able to get
a part-time job i wasn't what people
calling me a dog blood
see when you start was reborn as job
seeker it was still
282.20 a week but on top
it was the corona 275
a week in september that supplement
dropped
to 125 and in january it will drop again
to just 75 a week that's gonna put
a lot of people in a very very bad place
studying to be an interpreter with being
a single mum
she says australia is the lucky country
but she is worried about making ends
meet after january
please don't stop the payment or do
something for us
or at least reduce the price from the
supermarket
the last thing we should be doing is
cutting the incomes of people who have
the least
especially says when stage three
tax cuts for high income earnings are
still locked in for 2024.
those income tax cuts once all stages
are delivered
we'll be costing the budget over 30
billion
versus welfare cuts the treasurer's
[Music]
some of whom have paid a lot of tax
themselves
ben knight abc news federal treasurer
australia's economy has rebounded faster
than expected from the pandemic with
unemployment set to return to
pre-coronavirus levels in
four years the budget update shows
unemployment
is expected to peak at seven and a half
percent which is
lower than has previously been predicted
for more i'm joined by mark
kenny who's a senior fellow at the
australian studies institute
at the anu mark kenny good to talk to
you tonight so my ego shows the economy
is tracking better than predicted even
10 weeks ago in the october
[Music]
the budget of the economic side of this
whole corona crisis right through
uh particularly uh on the economic side
uh the states have clearly done a lot
too but
um
spending that the federal government has
embarked upon particularly job keeper
and job seeker
have been the difference between the
economy being
in serious trouble and having
absolutely catastrophic unemployment
to describe this as a primarily a health
crisis
uh rather than an economic one and i
think to some extent that argument's
[Music]
but certainly with job keeper and job
seeker
the unemployment has not been anywhere
near as bad
as it could have been in fact people
were warning of
somewhere in the order of 15 well it
looks like being
half of that that's a significant
achievement achievement in itself
but it's true also there's a lot of
underemployment and there's a lot of
unemployment
that is not showing up in the figures
it takes 72 hours
and it's the weekend so i don't want to
do that yeah quickly than was expected
but we also learned that the
unemployment rate will take fully four
years to get back to its pre-coping
level
so until there's no easy answers here
it's still a tough road
and that's presuming that we don't have
a worsening of the situation
uh corona wise
just in case yeah it is a concern and
let's just talk about that
because one of the cave races
okay well one of the things that uh josh
freidenberg was very happy
with
[Music]
and into the next couple of days will
people be looking around freely right
across the nation
or will state governments decide that
they're going to
make it from either from sydney or from
a part of sydney
or perhaps uh even even more drastically
than that close their borders to
interstate travelers or from new south
wales shoppers
we're not hoping any of that happens of
course it's a it's it's
it's just such a revelation really for
australia to be
going into into christmas in a much
better shape than
than many comfortable countries as a
result of our
successful handling of this of this
corona vital virus crisis but
um what we learned today out of new
south wales with this
northern beach cluster is that the virus
is still around
uh and the situation can deteriorate
very quickly and
that's a that's a vulnerability that is
by treasury and the treasurer
in the budget numbers we see today that
it is contingent
upon things like the vaccine
other things that are beyond the budget
control like
uh like yeah and what else itself
this really the year of the premiere
then they need to make sure that
decisions in terms of lockdowns and
border closures no
yeah i think it was it was a it was a
year where we saw the states come
storming back
[Music]
with incredibly drifting toward this
idea of
essentially a centrally governed nation
uh you know australian identity has uh
been
uh you know front and center um and uh
what this corona is done is it has shown
that there is a
category a lot
the federal government the state
governments are the agencies that
deliver
directly uh services you know whether it
be police health education
transport all of these things are
delivered by state governments and state
governments have acted very
you know there's been a lot of
parochialism that state governments have
acted very directly
for their discrete populations and
there's been a little bit of dividend in
that as well we've seen
three elections a couple in the
territories northern territory
and htt and of course the queensland
election and in all cases
the government have been returned and
we've seen polls that show that all
governments around australia the federal
and all the state governments have gone
up in their standing
because voters have applauded
governments
in a sense stopping the politics and
starting the problem solving that's
interesting australians have wanted so
yes it
has been the year of the premieres and i
think it's sort of
to some extent um really strengthened
the federation in that regard i need
more
there's something else that's yellow in
this category well i think the federal
government's performance has been very
strong i mean compare it to
the performance of uh of of like
countries like the uk and the us
where it is
failed to get on top of the virus at the
beginning
failed to take it seriously and have
then really spent the rest of the year
trying to find ways of justifying that
and not backpedaling and of course once
it's out of control
it's out of control that's the lesson in
so many countries
now australia the federal government
made some mistakes i think all
governments did and that's
to be expected this is a novel situation
um
but uh that's not withstanding and
notwithstanding
also the fact that the states did a lot
of the heavy lifting
uh the commonwealth government did
coordinate that the national cabinet was
a good idea
uh and uh and and eventually we saw the
federal government deciding to throw out
all that sort of
ideology and all its talk about balanced
budgets and everything else
and really start spending to protect the
economy to keep
employees connected to
to employees that coronavirus supplement
to the doll and a whole range of other
things and all of that has been
absolutely critical
a very strong embrace of expertise uh of
listening to the scientists and the
doctors about this
and i think all together australia can
say uh we've done well we've done the
population here state governments have
done well and i think our federal
government has done well
okay mark kenny good to get your
thoughts at the end of the year thank
you so much for your time over the
course of this year i hope you have a
very happy christmas
yeah thanks and the same to you karine i
really appreciate it
[Music]
fiji has declared a state of natural
disaster with a category five snipes
in the country tonight the storm is
bringing gale force winds heavy rain and
flash flooding
evacuation centres have been set up
across the island
and people in low-lying areas have been
warned to move to higher ground
a nighttime curfew here
the focus for this latest superstorm
storm
over 850 000 fijians
are in the direct path of the cycle 47.
there are warnings
has the potential to be one of the most
destructive i think it's
coronavirus cases in japan are soaring
forcing the government to suspend a
domestic travel campaign aimed at
stimulating the economy
yesterday was the second worst day on
record with 3 000 new infections
no that gets us a lot less three week
period dubbed critical
to contain the spread north asia
correspondent jake sturma reports from
tokyo
holidays are a time to travel see the
family and
we should
[Music]
but i don't think that's that big a deal
early to beat the crowd
[Music]
the infection spreads because of
socializing expressing how many people
spend their holidays quietly
[Music]
with an eye on the economy the
government's persistence
but cases are spiking as winter sets in
and
people head indoors in one hospital
where one hundred
ninety seven staff and patients tested
it's possible
to deploy military nurses i think those
are pretty good
travel subsidy scheme
travel should not necessarily be allowed
for a surge in new cases
measures to curb the spread during the
holiday period
[Music]
so we need to reduce big gatherings in
cities like tokyo and osaka
okay restaurants are still doing all
they can to encourage customers to
keep coming in as safely as possible
some for delivering food other venues
are going much better
i hope you enjoy thanks for watching and
i will see you next time so customers
can
continue eating and drinking
uninterrupted
it's a pandemic prompted touch that
seems sure
to stick around jake sturmer abc news
tokyo a french court has sentenced 14
people linked to the 2015
charlie hebdo killings and an attack on
a jewish supermarket in paris
two brothers shot dead 12 people at the
satirical magazine's office
after the publication of cartoons
depicting the prophet muhammed
a day later an associate killed a
policewoman
then carried out a deadly rampage at a
commission
my name is kirsten died in separate
places
[Music]
the former navy officer and mayor to
head the transportation department
mr butterjet rose 24 hours
earlier this year
in the incoming cabinet if confirmed by
the senate the eyes of history are on
disappointment
knowing that this is the first time an
american president has ever sent
an openly lgbtq cabinet member to the
senate
mike could make another one his
administration will be the most diverse
on record with nine barrier breaking
roles so far including his vice
president i think
[Music]
[Applause]
so let's sort by category value india is
battling hard on day one of the first
test at the adelaide oval after losing
two early wickets to the australian
paceman
captain virat kohli has been struck
several times
as india prepares for the first night
session of the match
australian testimony we have a country
here that's
white it's a real
right of war after such a difficult
investigation
[Applause]
mitchell stark looked menacing but
couldn't quite create another
breakthrough
it took until the 10th over for the
first boundary of the innings
as the indians dropped anchor to wait
out the australian assault
alas for india australia's third choice
paceman sailed on in well
immediately on their feet as the skipper
was tested by some short stuff
india went to the break at 2 41 with the
refreshed australians resuming their
plan for the indian master batsman on
resumption
coley's heart would have been in his
mouth for a moment the introduction of
spin allowed the batsman a few more
scoring options
coley happy to take it on
but there was also false shot as the
battle continued
neil cross abc news adelaide
the australian open will begin on the
18th of february
it could mean a long round trip for
australian players at home
who need to qualify for the tournament
the atp schedule also includes three
tournaments in melbourne the week before
the open
this after weeks of uncertainty is
probably going to be australian open
it appears
the victorian government is yet to take
off on it but the atp says the melbourne
park slam will run
from february 8. the atp schedule has
tournaments in the usa
and in january while australian open
qualifying in qatar will run from the
10th to the 13th
players will then all fly to melbourne
to quarantine for two weeks
once that's completed there'll be three
tournaments in melbourne
in order to qualify for their home slam
crikey
attention will now turn to which players
will come to melbourne
roger federer was hoping for a later
starting date to help recover from his
knee injury
[Music]
female sailors are making waves
featuring olympians around the world
sailors and young friends this reaction
is interesting
sisters claire and julie and costanzo
have been competitive about their love
of sailing since they were eight years
old
that sibling rivalry is being taken to a
new level
facing off in their first sydney to
hobart see out there in the open ocean
anything can happen
nonetheless i'll be right on her tail
the whole time
yeah i don't know about them
but i think nothing compares to the
hobart when you don't know what to
expect
they've had to put in the hard
you know we're either doing boat work or
on the water weekday trainings early
morning starts
yeah it's a lot of time and effort but
it's all worthwhile in the end
stacy jackson is now helping them learn
the ropes
again competing in her 14th blue water
classic
jackson's pleased women now have better
opportunities
in the male dominated sport and that
just gives that support that
i certainly didn't have when i was a
teenager dreaming of standing around the
world
olympic silver medalist nina curtis
hopes one day
soon there will be just as many women
competing as men
the boys kind of learn that there's no
difference between you and
them and it just gets easier and easier
the more integration you have the better
in 1946 jane tate was the first woman to
finish the sydney to hobart
this year more than 160 female sailors
are competing in the great ranks
abc